Lab01: Getting Set Up & Using Google
1.	Record Attendance
Attendance at Lab classes is a course requirement. It also contributes to your final grade. Attendance will be recorded at the beginning of each Lab class. If you arrive late you may be marked as absent.
2.	Reflection on Readings and Lectures
The purpose of this segment of the lab class is to give you the opportunity to discuss issues arising from readings and lectures for this week. You should have your Weekly Reflection Form completed and ready to hand in before you arrive at your Lab class. Even if you have not done this, take notes during the ensuing discussion.
Your tutor will direct questions to various members of the class. When you answer a question try to support your answer with evidence from the readings or lectures, or from further reading which you may have undertaken. You may wish to raise questions as well, to help you better understand the material.
In relation to the readings and lectures for this week be prepared to answer such questions as:
1.	What was the root of the problem in “The Price of Stupidity”?
2.	Who was to blame? Could the problem have been avoided?
3.	In relation to the collapse of span 10-11 of the West Gate bridge, which do you consider were the major contributing causes?
4.	Was there any loss of life? Which people or groups of people would you see as being primarily responsible? Should these parties be held accountable? To what extent?
5.	What lessons can be learned from the West Gate bridge collapse? Could the disaster have been averted? How?
6.	What was the root problem in the “Mars Climate Orbiter” disaster?
7.	Was there any loss of life? In terms of seriousness how does this disaster compare with the West Gate bridge? How do you arrive at your conclusion?
8.	Who was to blame? Should these parties be held accountable? To what extent? Could the problem have been avoided?
During class discussion you are encouraged to annotate your reflection form for the week. At the end of the discussion hand your reflection form to your tutor, who will grade your effort and record the results. The form will be returned to you next week. The weekly marks will be compounded to contribute to your final participation mark.
The mark for your weekly reflection exercise will be awarded according to the marking guide in Table 1.
Table 1: Marking Guide: Weekly Reflection Exercises		
Characteristics	Mark 	Grade
Main points of readings and lectures accurately identified and well expressed.
Discussion of similarities and differences shows insight and careful thought.
Annotations, where appropriate, are accurate and show good understanding of issues.	5	HD
Main points of readings and lectures satisfactorily identified and suitably expressed.
Discussion of similarities and differences shows some insight and thought.
Annotations, where appropriate, show some understanding of issues.	4	D/CR
All aspects present and generally adequate. No more than one or two less serious omissions or weaknesses.	3	P
Several omissions or weaknesses, such as main points incomplete, discussion showing little thought, few or no annotations. (2 = weak; 1 = unsatisfactory, 0 = not submitted) 	0, 1, 2	F
